The Project Gutenberg EBook of Spectropia; or, Surprising Spectral
Illusions, by J. H. Brown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this ebook.

Title: Spectropia; or, Surprising Spectral Illusions
       Showing Ghosts Everywhere, and of Any Colour

Author: J. H. Brown

Release Date: November 22, 2020 [EBook #63842]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Tim Lindell, Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The Internet
             Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SPECTROPIA; OR, SURPRISING
SPECTRAL ILLUSIONS ***





[Illustration: I

_Designed by J. H. Brown, and Published Decʳ. 19ᵗʰ. 1863, by Griffith &
Farran, Sᵗ. Paul’s Church Yard, London._]




                              SPECTROPIA;

                                  OR,

                    SURPRISING SPECTRAL ILLUSIONS.

                                SHOWING

                          GHOSTS EVERYWHERE,

                          AND OF ANY COLOUR.


                            BY J. H. BROWN.


                           _FOURTH EDITION._


                             First Series.
                      WITH SIXTEEN ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                LONDON:
                         GRIFFITH AND FARRAN,
                   SUCCESSORS TO NEWBERY AND HARRIS,
                   CORNER OF ST. PAUL’S CHURCHYARD.
                      H. & C. TREACHER, BRIGHTON.
                               MDCCCLXV.

                   [_Entered at Stationers’ Hall._]




INTRODUCTION.


The following Illusions are founded on two well-known facts; namely, the
persistency of impressions, and the production of complementary colours,
on the retina.

The explanations are divided into two Parts. The FIRST consists of
directions for seeing the spectres. The SECOND, a brief and popular, as
well as a scientific, description of the manner in which the spectres
are produced, and is intended for the use of those who may wish to know
more of this subject than is contained in the first Part.

As an apology for the apparent disregard of taste and fine art in the
plates, such figures are selected as best serve the purpose for which
they are intended.

                                                           J. H. BROWN.

OLD STEYNE, BRIGHTON.




DIRECTIONS.


To see the spectres, it is only necessary to look _steadily_ at the dot,
or asterisk, which is to be found on each of the plates, for about a
_quarter_ of a minute, or while counting about twenty, the plate being
well illuminated by either artificial or day light. Then turning the
eyes to the ceiling, the wall, the sky, or better still to a white sheet
hung on the wall of a darkened room (not totally dark), and looking
rather steadily at any one point, the spectre will soon begin to make
its appearance, increasing in intensity, and then gradually vanishing,
to reappear and again vanish; it will continue to do so several times in
succession, each reappearance being fainter than the one preceding.
Winking the eyes, or passing a finger rapidly to and fro before them,
will frequently hasten the appearance of the spectre, especially if the
plate has been strongly illuminated.

Those who use gaslight will find it convenient, after having looked at
the plate as above described, to extemporise a darkened room by having
the gaslight turned low; or one end of the room may be darkened by
placing a screen before the gas, lamp, or candle light.

The spectres may be easily made to appear life-sized or colossal, by
having the plate _nearer_ the eyes while receiving the impression, and
by _increasing the distance_ between the observer and the surface
against which they are seen. As a general rule, the observer should be
about eight to twenty feet from the surface. When the spectres are seen
against opposite houses, the sky, and other distant surfaces, they will
appear colossal.

Should any one not be able to see the spectre’s features, the reason
will be, either that the eyes have been allowed to wander, or the head
to move, while looking at the plate.

Many persons will see some one coloured spectre better than the others,
in consequence of their eyes not being equally sensitive to all colours.

The colours in the plate will be found to reverse themselves in the
spectres, as explained elsewhere, the spectres always appearing of the
complementary colour to that of the plate from which it is obtained.
Thus, blue will appear orange, and orange blue, &c.




LIST OF THE PLATES.


PLATE I.

This winged figure of Victory will give a white spectre by artificial
light (rather green by daylight), the red wreaths green, the green roses
red, and the orange stars blue.


PLATE II.

This black figure will give a white spectre.


PLATE III.

This will give a dark spectre.


PLATE IV.

This green figure will give a red spectre.


PLATE V.

And this red figure will give a green spectre.


PLATE VI.

This orange figure will give a blue spectre.


PLATE VII.

And this blue figure an orange spectre.


PLATE VIII.

This purple hand will give a yellow spectre.


PLATE IX.

And this yellow figure of Victory will give a purple spectre.


PLATE X.

The face of this figure will come out green in the spectre, the garment
red, and the cloud white.


PLATE XI.

This black skeleton will make a white spectre.


PLATE XII.

This skeleton will also give a white spectre, with a yellow mantle.


PLATE XIII.

This figure and broom will give a yellow spectre, cloak and hat red, and
moon white.


PLATE XIV.

These figures will give green and yellow spectres.


PLATE XV.

This Cupid will give a rose-coloured spectre, with bow and arrow yellow.


PLATE XVI.

This is a rainbow with colours reversed, the spectre of which will be
found a good resemblance of nature, especially when seen on a cloudy
sky.

       *       *       *       *       *

The colours of the spectres produced by these figures will not only be
subject to a slight variation in different eyes, but also by the degree
in which the plates are illuminated while being looked at.




A POPULAR AND SCIENTIFIC DESCRIPTION.


It is a curious fact that, in this age of scientific research, the
absurd follies of spiritualism should find an increase of supporters;
but mental epidemics seem at certain seasons to affect our minds, and
one of the oldest of these moral afflictions--witchcraft--is once more
prevalent in this nineteenth century, under the contemptible forms of
spirit-rapping and table-turning. The modern professor of these
impostures, like his predecessors in all such disreputable arts, is bent
only on raising the contents of the pockets of the most gullible portion
of humanity, and not the spirits of the departed, over which, as he well
knows, notwithstanding his profane assumption, he can have no power.

One thing we hope in some measure to further in the following pages, is
the extinction of the superstitious belief that apparitions are actual
spirits, by showing some of the many ways in which our senses may be
deceived, and that, in fact, no so-called ghost has ever appeared,
without its being referable either to mental or physiological deception,
or, in those instances where several persons have seen a spectre at the
same time, to natural objects, as in the case mentioned by Dr.
Abercrombie, in his work on “The Intellectual Powers:”--“A whole ship’s
company were thrown into the utmost consternation, by the apparition of
a cook who had died a few days before. He was distinctly seen walking
ahead of the ship, with a peculiar gait, by which he was distinguished
when alive, from having one of his legs shorter than the other. On
steering the ship toward the object, it was found to be a piece of
floating wreck.”

A ghost, according to the general descriptions of those who fancy they
have been favoured with a sight of one, appears to be of a pale
phosphorescent white, or bluish white colour; usually indistinct, and so
transparent that objects are easily seen through it. When moving, it
glides in a peculiar manner, the legs not being necessary to its
locomotion.

All the senses are more or less subject to deception, but the eye is
pre-eminently so; especially in the case of individuals who are in ill
health, because the sensibility of the retina is then generally much
exalted, as is also the imagination.

We may divide the illusions to which the sense of sight is liable into
four kinds. First, mental, or those arising in the brain itself, and
only referred to the eye. Second, those produced by the structure of the
eye. Third, those arising from the impressions of outward objects on the
retina. Fourth, those produced by various combinations of the foregoing.
It is only the second and third we shall have occasion to touch upon.
But before we can well understand their nature, it will be necessary to
get a slight knowledge of the structure of the eye, and some idea
respecting the nature of light.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

With perhaps the exception of the ear, the eye is the most wonderful
example of the infinite skill of the Creator. A more exquisite piece of
mechanism it is impossible for the human mind to conceive. The annexed
diagram (Fig. 1) of a horizontal section of this organ will give a
better idea of its general structure than whole pages of letter-press.
It will be seen to consist of a globe of three envelopes or coats, which
are kept distended by three transparent humours or lenses: the aqueous
(_e_), the crystalline (_f_), and the vitreous (_g_). The outer coat
(_a_) is dense, white, and fibrous. In front of the eye it gives place
to a perfectly transparent one, called the cornea (_d_). The next coat,
the choroid (_b_), is vascular, very black on its internal surface, in
order that light falling on it through the pupil (_h_) may not be
reflected. The pupil is an opening through a diaphragm which is called
the iris (_i_), from its colour varying in different individuals. It has
the power of expanding and contracting the pupil, for the purpose of
regulating the supply of light to the retina (_c_), or third and last
coat which lies immediately on the choroid. It is transparent, very
complex, and the only part of the eye we shall carefully consider. The
following diagram (Fig. 2) represents a section of it magnified 250
diameters, _a_ is called the limitary membrane, and forms its innermost
surface, or that which is next the vitreous humour; _b_ consists of the
layer of optic nerve fibers; _c_ is a layer of grey nerve cells; _d_,
two layers in which the principal retinal blood-vessels are spread out;
_e_, two layers of granular matter; _f_, Jacob’s membrane, or layer of
rods and cones. Fig. 3 will give some idea of the supposed connexion
between these various parts, the same letters referring to the same
parts as in Fig. 2.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

When a ray of light enters the eye, it passes through the humours or
lenses, and is formed by them into an image, on the choroid, of the
object looked at. The extremities of the rods and cones have the power
of appreciating the image there formed, and convey it up through the
ultimate parts of the retina (Fig. 2), thence along the optic nerve
fibres to the brain. We are inclined to regard the extremities of the
rods and cones as the true seat of perception, in consequence of
observing a considerable distance between the retinal blood-vessels and
the choroid, when performing Purkinje’s experiment.[A] This experiment
consists in passing a lighted candle slowly to and fro before the eyes,
at about two or three inches from the nose, when the retinal vessels
will exhibit themselves before the observer not unlike branching trees.
They may be seen by daylight, by passing the large teeth of an ordinary
comb slowly backwards and forwards before the eye, whilst looking on a
smooth sheet of paper, or upon the sky. Fig. 4 represents those of the
left eye, as seen by candlelight. The spot marked _k_ is the exact
centre of the retina. (The same letter marks the same spot in Fig. 1.)
It is the seat of most distinct vision. _j_ is the entrance of the optic
nerve (Figs. 4 and 1), from the centre of which the retinal artery will
be seen emerging and spreading over the entire retina; but in the
diagram that part only is represented which could be seen tolerably
distinct. The background to the artery appears of a pale red, except at
the part occupied by the optic nerve, where it is white.

[A] This distance can easily be perceived by getting an impression
on the retina, according to the “Directions,” page 4, and then, on
performing the above experiment, the arterial ramifications and the
central spot will be distinctly perceived to move over the spectral
figure.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

After this rapid glance at so complicated a structure, and bearing in
mind that some persons can see its several parts with vastly greater
facility than others, it cannot be a matter of surprise that individuals
not aware of these facts are, now and then--especially at night, and
when carrying a light about--startled by what they fancy an apparition,
but which is in reality nothing more than some part of the structures
above considered. A lady assures us that she saw the ghost of her
husband as she was going downstairs with a lighted candle in her hand.
The spot _k_, Fig. 4, when seen against a wall a few feet distant,
appears about the size of a human head, and wants very little to furnish
it with features. Figured paper on the wall, and a host of other things,
may supply them, or even the retinal artery, which often lends body and
limbs. (Fig. 5.)

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

Besides the above-mentioned structures, there are others which may play
an important part in these illusions, especially the common _muscæ
volantes_, so called from their resemblance to flying flies. They
consist of cells and filaments, the _débris_ of the structures of the
eye, and float about in its humours. That some of them exist very near
the retina appears evident from the fact that, on placing the eyes close
to a gauze wire blind, distinct miniature images of parts of the gauze
will be seen in them. (Fig. 6.)

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

We now pass on to consider some of the leading properties of Light.
There have been many theories propounded from time to time in order to
explain the various phenomena connected with this subject, but only one
accords well with all, and that is called the undulatory or vibratory
theory, which, from its numerous complications, will compel us to
confine ourselves to a consideration of that part only which is
necessary to our present use. This theory regards light as the
vibrations of an imponderable ether pervading all space, the number of
these vibrations varying in a given time for each of the three primary
colours--blue, yellow, and red--the greatest number producing blue, the
least red, and an intermediate number yellow, all other colours being
produced by the combination of these in various proportions. Any two of
the three primary colours mixed together makes the complementary colour
to the third, and the third is also complementary to it. Thus, blue and
yellow make green, which is the complementary colour to red; red and
blue make purple, complementary to yellow; yellow and red make orange,
complementary to blue. When the three primary colours are mixed
together, white is the result: so that when a ray of white light falls
upon a piece of paper, and all the vibrations are equally reflected, the
paper will appear white, and if they are all absorbed, it will appear
black; but, if the paper absorbs some and reflects others, it will
appear coloured. Thus, if it absorbs those producing red, it will appear
green, from the mixture of the vibrations producing blue and yellow; and
if it absorbs blue and yellow, and reflects red, then it will appear
red. In this manner any object we look at will appear of any particular
colour, according to which vibrations it absorbs and which it reflects.

The retina is so admirably constructed that it is susceptible of
different impressions of colour by these different vibrations, except in
the case of a few individuals, who are either blind to all colour, and
therefore see everything black or white, and their intermediate shades,
or who are blind to only one or two colours.

When we look steadily at a red object for a few seconds, that part of
the retina on which the image impinges begins to get less sensitive to
vibrations producing red, but more sensitive to those producing blue
and yellow; so that on turning the eye away from the red object, and
permitting a little white light to enter it, that part of the retina
which received the red image will, in consequence of its diminished
sensibility to that colour, and its exalted sensibility to blue and
yellow, be able to perceive the two latter colours best, and by their
mixture will give rise to a green image of the red object. The same
thing will be observed with all the other colours; the secondary image
or spectre always appearing of the complementary colour to the object
from which the impression is obtained.

The duration and vividness of these impressions on the retina vary
greatly in different individuals, and can be procured from almost any
object. A person may, after looking steadily, and as often happens,
unconsciously, for a short time at printed or painted figures, on paper,
porcelain, &c., see, on turning the head in some other direction, a
life-sized or colossal spectre (the spectre appears larger the greater
the distance of the surface against which it is seen), and there can be
little doubt but that many of the reputed ghosts originate in this
manner.

[Illustration: II

_Designed by J. H. Brown, and Published Decʳ. 19ᵗʰ. 1863, by Griffith &
Farran, Sᵗ. Paul’s Church Yard, London._]

[Illustration: III]

[Illustration: IV

_Designed by J. H. Brown, and Published Decʳ. 19ᵗʰ. 1863, by Griffith &
Farran, Sᵗ. Paul’s Church Yard, London._]

[Illustration: V

_Designed by J. H. Brown, and Published Decʳ. 19ᵗʰ. 1863, by Griffith &
Farran, Sᵗ. Paul’s Church Yard, London._]

[Illustration: VI

_Designed by J. H. Brown, and Published Decʳ. 19ᵗʰ. 1863, by Griffith &
Farran, Sᵗ. Paul’s Church Yard, London._]

[Illustration: VII

_Designed by J. H. Brown, and Published Decʳ. 19ᵗʰ. 1863, by Griffith &
Farran, Sᵗ. Paul’s Church Yard, London._]

[Illustration: VIII

_Designed by J. H. Brown, and Published Decʳ. 19ᵗʰ. 1863, by Griffith &
Farran, Sᵗ. Paul’s Church Yard, London._]

[Illustration: IX

_Designed by J. H. Brown, and Published Decʳ. 19ᵗʰ. 1863, by Griffith &
Farran, Sᵗ. Paul’s Church Yard, London._]

[Illustration: X

_Designed by J. H. Brown, and Published Decʳ. 19ᵗʰ. 1863, by Griffith &
Farran, Sᵗ. Paul’s Church Yard, London._]

[Illustration: XI

_Designed by J. H. Brown, and Published Decʳ. 19ᵗʰ. 1863, by Griffith &
Farran, Sᵗ. Paul’s Church Yard, London._]

[Illustration: XII

_Designed by J. H. Brown, and Published Decʳ. 19ᵗʰ. 1863, by Griffith &
Farran, Sᵗ. Paul’s Church Yard, London._]

[Illustration: XIII

_Designed by J. H. Brown, and Published Decʳ. 19ᵗʰ. 1863, by Griffith &
Farran, Sᵗ. Paul’s Church Yard, London._]

[Illustration: XIV

_Designed by J. H. Brown, and Published Decʳ. 19ᵗʰ. 1863, by Griffith &
Farran, Sᵗ. Paul’s Church Yard, London._]

[Illustration: XV

_Designed by J. H. Brown, Published Decʳ. 19ᵗʰ. 1863, by Griffith &
Farran, Sᵗ. Paul’s Church Yard, London._]

[Illustration: XVI

_Designed by J. H. Brown, and Published Decʳ. 19ᵗʰ. 1863, by Griffith &
Farran, Sᵗ. Paul’s Church Yard, London._]

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SPECTROPIA; OR, SURPRISING SPECTRAL
ILLUSIONS ***

***** This file should be named 63842-0.txt or 63842-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/8/4/63842/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

